Now to come to an end,
I now also want to add a little database to this whole thing
so that we don't store the data just in our in-memory storage which will be lost whenever we restart
the server or when we're running out of memory and our server needs to free up some memory, instead
I now want to use a real database and of course you can spend hours or a complete course on just databases
and indeed I have a complete guide on MongoDB which is a database
in case you're interested in that as well besides my Node.js course. So definitely check out these two
courses if you want to learn more about Node.js or MongoDB which is a very popular database engine
that works together with Node.js as particularly well
and indeed it's this MongoDB thing which we will try out now.
You can visit mongodb.com to learn more about it and get started and what we will use here is
a cloud service they offer so that we don't have to install and administer a local database which is
a lot of work. For that you should sign in here or try free to create an account,
it doesn't cost you anything,
you just need to create an account here
and once you did create such an account and you did sign in, you will either end up on a screen like this
or on a welcome screen where you can build your own new cluster.
You can simply walk through all that cluster configuration then and pick the AWS option here, pick
something where you see free tier available so that it doesn't cost you anything to get started,
leave all the other default settings here but double check down there for the cluster here that you're
going with one which is free tier eligible,
that would be this M0 sandbox which I can't choose here because I already created a cluster based on that,
you should be able to choose that and then leave all the other settings,
give it any name you want and create that cluster.
Now I already did that here,
I do have such a cluster here and this is just a cluster for multiple databases
you can add. Now click on connect thereafter to learn how you can connect and there on connect your application
and there, this URL will become important later.
Now actually before we do that however, go to database access and there you can create a new user with
any password of your choice which needs to have at least read and write access to your database. Also
go to network access and there under IP whitelist,
click on add IP address and make sure you add your local IP address, you should see this option here
if you haven't added it already as I did,
so your local IP address should be added here. With that you can go back to clusters
and now we can connect our application to this. The question of course is, how do we now use this URL
here? How do we now connect to this database? And for that you can search for Node.js MongoDB driver
and you should find this page here, where you can learn more about the MongoDB driver which
is simply a third-party package for Node.js that makes working with MongoDB and sending requests
to it very easy. You just need to run this command here, npm install mongodb --save,
so let's do that in our Node.js application, not on the frontend, you won't communicate directly to
the database from there,
we do that from our backend
and with that done, we can start using that driver.
Now of course you can learn all about the driver here in the documentation here, by clicking on reference
here for example, you can learn more about installing the driver and how to use it
and we're interested in the CRUD operations, which stands for Create Read Update and Delete because we
want to add data, we want to read data,
these are two things we want to do here.
Again if you want to learn more about MongoDB and Node.js and how they work together,
my Node.js course and my MongoDB course are great to dive in because in both I cover MongoDB
and in both
I also cover a bit of Node.js of course with the different focuses depending on the course title.
Now here you see quite good examples though,
for example for how you add something to the database and therefore we'll build up on that.
It all starts by importing this Mongo client, so let's copy that code, go to our location.js file in
the routers folder and import this here and then we want to perform in such an insert operation when we
get a new location.
Now we need our connection URL, so we can copy that and set this up globally here in location.js
as well outside of our middleware functions
and this URL here of course should be the URL you find on your cluster, so you can just copy
that URL and enter this here and now replace user name with the name of the user you created and
the password as well,
so in my case I'm working with Maximilian as a user here and I am using a password which by the time
you're watching this of course will have been changed already. Now in this connection string here, this
/test thing, that's the database you want to connect to and you can specify any name you want here,
if it doesn't exist yet it will be created on the fly and I'll name it locations and you'll leave to
the rest as it is. Now back to this CRUD operations description here,
now we need to create a Mongo client here based on this Mongo client we're importing and we can just
call client like this and pass in this connection URL and then we need to call client connect,
use this callback function which we pass to it and inside of that callback function where we get access
to the connected client, we can then use that client to run queries against it. So we can copy this here,
this entire code and move that into our post route here, using this client here with that callback
function, remove these assert statements,
we don't need to do that here,
you can remove the console logs here,
we should leave that line here where we get access to the database which we connected to on this client
and then MongoDB works with so-called collections and documents.
You have a collection which is like a table of records and you have a document which is like a simple
row in that table.
So we have a collection here which I'll name user locations, user-locations and with insert one.
you can insert one new document there,
the document I want to insert here should have the same format as what I inserted here in my local memory
storage.
We can comment out this code now but I copied the object structure first,
the one thing that differs is the ID. You don't need to add an ID field anymore,
MongoDB will create an ID for you automatically.
Now insert one does not just take this argument,
it also takes a function which will fire as soon as it is done with this operation,
this gives you either an error or the result of that operation and here we can get rid of this
other dummy code with insert many, we don't do that here.
So we're good like that,
we now just want to make sure that here in this function which fires once we're done inserting this,
we send back our response.
So we grab this response code and only send this once this function executes again for all these asynchronous
code logic where this will run at a later point of time
basically once this operation completed.
Now theoretically, we should also check for errors here and send back a different response if we got
one
but to save some time here and not make this overly complicated, for now we'll just assume that this
always works,
again more detailed error handling and so on is covered in the dedicated courses.
So now here we're storing this,
the ID I want to send back has to be retrieved from that result we get here
however.
So for that let's console log r so that we see what's in there when we store something and with that,
let's restart our node application here and let's give this a try.
When we find a place here, that's generally looking good
okay now we got an error here,
now let's see what went wrong here on the backend by expanding this log and we cannot read DB of
null is the problem here,
yes because DB name here of course does not exist,
I don't have such a variable. My DB name is locations, so we should just enter locations here,
I remove that DB name constant from the example or didn't add it to be precise.
So we want to connect to the locations database or use the locations database to which we connect here
and now with that changed, let's restart this backend server and
let's give this another try by again finding a new place here and now this didn't throw a new error,
if I cleared the errors,
we don't see a new error here and indeed here we get a success response and this is the object we get
back by MongoDB, quite a complex object. In the end what it will have though is an inserted ID property
which is just what we need here.
So we send back here not ID but r.insertedId, that's what I want to send back to the client
and now we don't need to generate our own ID here anymore. With that
if we now restart this and we find a new place,
now you see here we got this ID which is generated on the backend.
So with that we're storing data in MongoDB, now retrieving it would also be nice when we send the get request
from this page because right now of course we fail here because we have no logic to retrieve our data
but the MongoDB driver docs got us covered. Here
if we scroll down, we find more functions we can execute, for example for updating and for deleting documents
but I want to find a document,
so we want to have a look at the read methods here and there,
again we have all the logic for connecting. In the end, what we can do here is we can just copy this code
here from our add-location route into this get route here
after we retrieved the location ID, effectively replacing this code where we use the memory database
and I still want to connect to my client here, reach out to the database and reach out to the user
locations collection but now of course I don't want to insert one, I want to find one document instead
and you still pass an object to find one but here, you specify the criteria for finding a document and
you can find a document by ID here.
The ID is actually stored on an _id field in MongoDB, so we can use _id here
and then use the extracted location ID which no longer should be a number,
so let's remove the plus here as a value.
So now we will try to find a document where the ID is equal to that location ID as a string which
we retrieved from the URL.
Now we have to pass a second argument to find one which is this function which executes once this operation
is done,
we either get an error or we get the document which we are looking for
and here I expect to get the document,
so when we return something here, I of course want to use this logic from before.
I'll cut that code and add it here and check if we don't have a document for some reason, in which case
I still return the not found error but if we did find one, then I wouldn't return a response where the
address can be found on the document,
there it is stored such that we have an address property and also get the coords from the document and
the rest should be able to stay as it is. So let's give it a try,
let's save that and rerun the server here and now let's reload this place. Now I still get could not
find location and the reason for data is something MongoDB specific,
the ID of an element which is added to the database is not actually a string,
it's a special data type MongoDB uses internally, it's an object ID which is not a Javascript
data type but a MongoDB specific one. Now when you query for an ID here, you therefore have
to look for a such an object ID data type. You can do so by using that Mongo client, thankfully it's
not too hard to do that however. When we import our MongoDB package here, we can not just reach out
to the Mongo client here,
let's restructure this a bit and import MongoDB here just from MongoDB and get the client then from
MongoDB.client so that we can get other things out of MongoDB as well because the other things
I'm interested in in this case here is this object ID constructor. We can use MongoDB object ID
here and call new in front of it because this actually is basically a class which you can construct
and to that, you pass your ID as a string,
so in our case location ID and it will wrap this in its own data structure which now can be used in
a query and with that change made, we restart that server,
we can go back here, reload this place and we get this place here and that's it.
Now this is by no means a finished server,
we could do far more on this server, improve error handling, add more scenarios, make this code more reusable
and not always create a new connection here but this is just there to get you started with Node.js
and even MongoDB which is not directly related to Javascript after all
and it's there to show you how Javascript is able to run in different environments and how you generally
have the same syntax but still can do very different things with it and that's therefore it for this module.
As I mentioned multiple times, if you want to learn more about Node.js and/or MongoDB, I got dedicated
courses for that, in my Node.js course for example, I also spend a lot of time on MongoDB diving way
deeper into it and showing you how you can connect it to Node.js in various different ways and therefore
these are the resources you want to dive in if you want to learn more,
this hopefully still gives you a great overview of what you can generally do there and how that works.